QUOTES AND IMAGES FROM THE DIARY OF PEPYS




THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS


By Samuel Pepys






20s. in money, and what wine she
needed, for the burying him

A good handsome wench I kissed, the
first that I have seen

A fair salute on horseback, in
Rochester streets, of the lady

A most conceited fellow and not over
much in him

A conceited man, but of no Logique in
his head at all

A pretty man, I would be content to
break a commandment with him

A lady spit backward upon me by a
mistake

A play not very good, though commended
much

A cat will be a cat still

A book the Bishops will not let be
printed again

A most tedious, unreasonable, and
impertinent sermon

About two o'clock, too late and too
soon to go home to bed

Academy was dissolved by order of the
Pope

Act of Council passed, to put out all
Papists in office

Advantage a man of the law hath over
all other people

Afeard of being louzy

After taking leave of my wife, which we
could hardly do kindly

After awhile I caressed her and parted
seeming friends

After many protestings by degrees I did
arrive at what I would

After oysters, at first course, a hash
of rabbits, a lamb

After a harsh word or two my wife and I
good friends

All ended in love

All made much worse in their report
among people than they are

All the fleas came to him and not to me

All divided that were bred so long at
school together

All may see how slippery places all
courtiers stand in

All things to be managed with faction

All the towne almost going out of towne
(Plague panic)

Ambassador--that he is an honest man
sent to lie abroad

Among  many lazy people that the
diligent man becomes necessary

An exceeding pretty lass, and right for
the sport

An offer of L500 for a Baronet's
dignity

And for his beef, says he, "Look how
fat it is"

And if ever I fall on it again, I
deserve to be undone

And a deal of do of which I am weary

And they did lay pigeons to his feet

And there, did what I would with her

And so to sleep till the morning, but
was bit cruelly

And so to bed and there entertained her
with great content

And feeling for a chamber-pott, there
was none

And with the great men in curing of
their claps

And so by coach, though hard to get it,
being rainy, home

Angry, and so continued till bed, and
did not sleep friends

Aptness I have to be troubled at any
thing that crosses me

Archbishop is a wencher, and known to
be so

As much his friend as his interest will
let him

As very a gossip speaking of her
neighbours as any body

As all other women, cry, and yet talk
of other things

As he called it, the King's seventeenth
whore abroad

As all things else did not come up to
my expectations

Asleep, while the wench sat mending my
breeches by my bedside

At least 12 or 14,000 people in the
street (to see the hanging)

At a loss whether it will be better for
me to have him die

Badge of slavery upon the whole people
(taxes)

Baker's house in Pudding Lane, where
the late great fire begun

Baseness and looseness of the Court

Bath at the top of his house

Beare-garden

Because I would not be over sure of any
thing

Before I sent my boy out with them, I
beat him for a lie

Begun to smell, and so I caused it to
be set forth (corpse)

Being there, and seeming to do
something, while we do not

Being cleansed of lice this day by my
wife

Being very poor and mean as to the
bearing with trouble

Being taken with a Psalmbook or
Testament

Below what people think these great
people say and do

Best fence against the Parliament's
present fury is delay

Better now than never

Bewailing the vanity and disorders of
the age

Bite at the stone, and not at the hand
that flings it

Bleeding behind by leeches will cure
him

Bold to deliver what he thinks on every
occasion

Book itself, and both it and them not
worth a turd

Bookseller's, and there looked for
Montaigne's Essays

Bottle of strong water; whereof now and
then a sip did me good

Bought for the love of the binding
three books

Bought Montaigne's Essays, in English

Bowling-ally (where lords and ladies
are now at bowles)

Boy up to-night for his sister to teach
him to put me to bed

Bring me a periwig, but it was full of
nits

Bringing over one discontented man, you
raise up three

Bristol milk (the sherry) in the vaults

Broken sort of people, that have not
much to lose

Burned it, that it might not be among
my books to my shame

Business of abusing the Puritans begins
to grow stale

But a woful rude rabble there was, and
such noises

But so fearful I am of discontenting my
wife

But I think I am not bound to discover
myself

But we were friends again as we are
always

But this the world believes, and so let
them

But if she will ruin herself, I cannot
help it

But my wife vexed, which vexed me

Buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and
chaw

Buying up of goods in case there should
be war

Buying his place of my Lord Barkely

By his many words and no understanding,
confound himself

By chewing of tobacco is become very
fat and sallow

By and by met at her chamber, and there
did what I would

By her wedding-ring, I suppose he hath
married her at last

Called at a little ale-house, and had
an eele pye

Came to bed to me, but all would not
make me friends

Cannot bring myself to mind my business

Cannot be clean to go so many bodies
together in the same water

Cast stones with his horne crooke

Castlemayne is sicke again, people
think, slipping her filly

Catched cold yesterday by putting off
my stockings

Catholiques are everywhere and bold

Cavaliers have now the upper hand clear
of the Presbyterians

Charles Barkeley's greatness is only
his being pimp to the King

Chocolate was introduced into England
about the year 1652

Church, where a most insipid young
coxcomb preached

City to be burned, and the Papists to
cut our throats

Clap of the pox which he got about
twelve years ago

Clean myself with warm water; my wife
will have me

Comb my head clean, which I found so
foul with powdering

Come to see them in bed together, on
their wedding-night

Come to us out of bed in his furred
mittens and furred cap

Comely black woman.--[The old
expression for a brunette.]

Coming to lay out a great deal of money
in clothes for my wife

Commons, where there is nothing done
but by passion, and faction

Compliment from my aunt, which I take
kindly as it is unusual

Confidence, and vanity, and disparages
everything

Confusion of years in the case of the
months of January (etc.)

Consult my pillow upon that and every
great thing of my life

Content as to be at our own home, after
being abroad awhile

Contracted for her as if he had been
buying a horse

Convenience of periwiggs is so great

Could not saw above 4 inches of the
stone in a day

Counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with
them, but had but little

Court is in a way to ruin all for their
pleasures

Court attendance infinite tedious

Craft and cunning concerning the buying
and choosing of horses

Credit of this office hath received by
this rogue's occasion

Cruel custom of throwing at cocks on
Shrove Tuesday

Cure of the King's evil, which he do
deny altogether

Dare not oppose it alone for making an
enemy and do no good

Declared he will never have another
public mistress again

Delight to see these poor fools decoyed
into our condition

Deliver her from the hereditary curse
of child-bearing

Desk fastened to one of the armes of
his chayre

Did dig another, and put our wine in
it; and I my Parmazan cheese

Did extremely beat him, and though it
did trouble me to do it

Did so watch to see my wife put on
drawers, which (she did)

Did take me up very prettily in one or
two things that I said

Did much insist upon the sin of
adultery

Did go to Shoe Lane to see a
cocke-fighting at a new pit there

Did find none of them within, which I
was glad of

Did tumble them all the afternoon as I
pleased

Did trouble me very much to be at
charge to no purpose

Did see the knaveries and tricks of
jockeys

Did not like that Clergy should meddle
with matters of state

Did put evil thoughts in me, but
proceeded no further

Dined with my wife on pease porridge
and nothing else

Dined upon six of my pigeons, which my
wife has resolved to kill

Dined at home alone, a good calves head
boiled and dumplings

Dinner, an ill and little mean one,
with foul cloth and dishes

Discontented at the pride and luxury of
the Court

Discontented that my wife do not go
neater now she has two maids

Discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all
manner of learning

Discoursed much against a man's lying
with his wife in Lent

Discoursing upon the sad condition of
the times

Disease making us more cruel to one
another than if we are doggs

Disorder in the pit by its raining in,
from the cupola

Disquiet all night, telling of the
clock till it was daylight

Do outdo the Lords infinitely (debates
in the Commons)

Do look upon me as a remembrancer of
his former vanity

Do bury still of the plague seven or
eight in a day

Doe from Cobham, when the season comes,
bucks season being past

Dog attending us, which made us all
merry again

Dog, that would turn a sheep any way
which

Doubtfull of himself, and easily be
removed from his own opinion

Down to the Whey house and drank some
and eat some curds

Dr. Calamy is this day sent to Newgate
for preaching

Drink a dish of coffee

Driven down again with a stinke by Sir
W. Pen's shying of a pot

Duke of York and Mrs. Palmer did talk
to one another very wanton

Duodecimal arithmetique

Durst not take notice of her, her
husband being there

Dying this last week of the plague 112,
from 43 the week before

Eat some of the best cheese-cakes that
ever I eat in my life

Eat of the best cold meats that ever I
eat on in all my life

Eat a mouthful of pye at home to stay
my stomach

Eat some butter and radishes

Enough existed to build a ship (Pieces
of the true Cross)

Enquiring into the selling of places do
trouble a great many

Erasmus "de scribendis epistolis"

Even to the having bad words with my
wife, and blows too

Every man looking after himself, and
his owne lust and luxury

Every small thing is enough now-a-days
to bring a difference

Every body leads, and nobody follows

Every body is at a great losse and
nobody can tell

Every body's looks, and discourse in
the street is of death

Exceeding kind to me, more than usual,
which makes me afeard

Exclaiming against men's wearing their
hats on in the church

Excommunications, which they send upon
the least occasions

Expectation of profit will have its
force

Expected musique, the missing of which
spoiled my dinner

Faced white coat, made of one of my
wife's pettycoates

Familiarity with her other servants is
it that spoils them all

Fanatiques do say that the end of the
world is at hand

Fashionable and black spots

Fear all his kindness is but only his
lust to her

Fear that the goods and estate would be
seized (after suicide)

Fear it may do him no good, but me hurt

Fear I shall not be able to wipe my
hands of him again

Fear she should prove honest and refuse
and then tell my wife

Feared I might meet with some people
that might know me

Fearful that I might not go far enough
with my hat off

Fears some will stand for the
tolerating of Papists

Fell to sleep as if angry

Fell a-crying for joy, being all
maudlin and kissing one another

Fell to dancing, the first time that
ever I did in my life

Fetch masts from New England

Feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce
to let him blood

Few in any age that do mind anything
that is abstruse

Find that now and then a little
difference do no hurte

Find it a base copy of a good
originall, that vexed me

Find myself to over-value things when a
child

Finding my wife not sick, but yet out
of order

Finding my wife's clothes lie
carelessly laid up

Fire grow; and, as it grew darker,
appeared more and more

First time that ever I heard the organs
in a cathedral

First their apes, that they may be
afterwards their slaves

First thing of that nature I did ever
give her (L10 ring)

First time I had given her leave to
wear a black patch

Fixed that the year should commence in
January instead of March

Fool's play with which all publick
things are done

For my quiet would not enquire into it

For, for her part, she should not be
buried in the commons

For a land-tax and against a general
excise

For I will not be inward with him that
is open to another

For I will be hanged before I seek to
him, unless I see I need

Force a man to swear against himself

Forced to change gold, 8s. 7d.;
servants and poor, 1s. 6d.

Forgetting many things, which her
master beat her for

Formerly say that the King was a
bastard and his mother a whore

Found my brother John at eight o'clock
in bed, which vexed me

Found him a fool, as he ever was, or
worse

Found him not so ill as I thought that
he had been ill

Found in my head and body about twenty
lice, little and great

Found to be with child, do never stir
out of their beds

Found guilty, and likely will be hanged
(for stealing spoons)

France, which is accounted the best
place for bread

Frequent trouble in things we deserve
best in

Frogs and many insects do often fall
from the sky, ready formed

From some fault in the meat to complain
of my maid's sluttery

Gadding abroad to look after beauties

Galileo's air thermometer, made before
1597

Gamester's life, which I see is very
miserable, and poor

Gave him his morning draft

Generally with corruption, but most
indeed with neglect

Gentlewomen did hold up their heads to
be kissed by the King

Get his lady to trust herself with him
into the tavern

Give the King of France Nova Scotia,
which he do not like

Give her a Lobster and do so touse her
and feel her all over

Give the other notice of the future
state, if there was any

Glad to be at friendship with me,
though we hate one another

Gladder to have just now received it
(than a promise)

God knows that I do not find honesty
enough in my own mind

God forgive me! what thoughts and
wishes I had

God help him, he wants bread.

God forgive me! what a mind I had to
her

God! what an age is this, and what a
world is this

Going with her woman to a hot-house to
bathe herself

Gold holds up its price still

Goldsmiths in supplying the King with
money at dear rates

Good sport of the bull's tossing of the
dogs

Good wine, and anchovies, and pickled
oysters (for breakfast)

Good purpose of fitting ourselves for
another war (A Peace)

Good writers are not admired by the
present

Got her upon my knee (the coach being
full) and played with her

Great thaw it is not for a man to walk
the streets

Great newes of the Swedes declaring for
us against the Dutch

Great deale of tittle tattle discourse
to little purpose

Great many silly stories they tell of
their sport

Greater number of Counsellors is, the
more confused the issue

Greatest businesses are done so
superficially

Had no more manners than to invite me
and to let me pay

Had his hand cut off, and was hanged
presently!

Had what pleasure almost I would with
her

Had the umbles of it for dinner

Half a pint of Rhenish wine at the
Still-yard, mixed with beer

Hanged with a silken halter

Hanging jack to roast birds on

Hard matter to settle to business after
so much leisure

Hate in others, and more in myself, to
be careless of keys

Hates to have any body mention what he
had done the day before

Hath not a liberty of begging till he
hath served three years

Hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning
one to conceal his evil

Hath given her the pox, but I hope it
is not so

Have not known her this fortnight
almost, which is a pain to me

Have not any awe over them from the
King's displeasure (Commons)

Have not much to lose, and therefore
will venture all

Have been so long absent that I am
ashamed to go

Having some experience, but greater
conceit of it than is fit

He that will not stoop for a pin, will
never be worth a pound

He made but a poor sermon, but long

He has been inconvenienced by being too
free in discourse

He having made good promises, though I
fear his performance

He hoped he should live to see her
"ugly and willing"

He is too wise to be made a friend of

He was fain to lie in the priest's hole
a good while

He was charged with making himself
popular

He is, I perceive, wholly sceptical, as
well as I

He is a man of no worth in the world
but compliment

He is not a man fit to be told what one
hears

Heard noises over their head upon the
leads

Heeling her on one side to make her
draw little water

Helping to slip their calfes when there
is occasion

Her months upon her is gone to bed

Here I first saw oranges grow

Hired her to procure this poor soul for
him

His enemies have done him as much good
as he could wish

His readiness to speak spoilt all

His satisfaction is nothing worth, it
being easily got

His company ever wearys me

Holes for me to see from my closet into
the great office

Hopes to have had a bout with her
before she had gone

Houses marked with a red cross upon the
doors

How the Presbyterians would be angry if
they durst

How highly the Presbyters do talk in
the coffeehouses still

How little merit do prevail in the
world, but only favour

How little heed is had to the prisoners
and sicke and wounded

How unhappily a man may fall into a
necessity of bribing people

How natural it is for us to slight
people out of power

How little to be presumed of in our
greatest undertakings

Hugged, it being cold now in the
mornings .  .  .  .

I took occasion to be angry with him

I could not forbear to love her
exceedingly

I do not value her, or mind her as I
ought

I did what I would, and might have done
anything else

I have itched mightily these 6 or 7
days

I know not whether to be glad or sorry

I was as merry as I could counterfeit
myself to be

I could have answered, but forbore

I have a good mind to have the
maidenhead of this girl

I know not how in the world to abstain
from reading

I fear that it must be as it can, and
not as I would

I had six noble dishes for them,
dressed by a man-cook

I find her painted, which makes me
loathe her (cosmetics)

I did get her hand to me under my cloak

I perceive no passion in a woman can be
lasting long

I having now seen a play every day this
week

I was very angry, and resolve to beat
him to-morrow

I know not yet what that is, and am
ashamed to ask

I do not like his being angry and in
debt both together to me

I will not by any over submission make
myself cheap

I slept soundly all the sermon

I and she never were so heartily angry
in our lives as to-day

I calling her beggar, and she me
pricklouse, which vexed me

I love the treason I hate the traitor

I would not enquire into anything, but
let her talk

I kissed the bride in bed, and so the
curtaines drawne

I have promised, but know not when I
shall perform

I met a dead corps of the plague, in
the narrow ally

I am a foole to be troubled at it,
since I cannot helpe it

I was exceeding free in dallying with
her, and she not unfree

I was a great Roundhead when I was a
boy

I pray God to make me able to pay for
it.

I took a broom and basted her till she
cried extremely

I was demanded L100, for the fee of the
office at 6d. a pound

I never designed to be a witness
against any man

I fear is not so good as she should be

If the exportations exceed importations

If it should come in print my name
maybe at it

Ill from my late cutting my hair so
close to my head

Ill all this day by reason of the last
night's debauch

Ill sign when we are once to come to
study how to excuse

Ill humour to be so against that which
all the world cries up

Ill-bred woman, would take exceptions
at anything any body said

In my nature am mighty unready to
answer no to anything

In men's clothes, and had the best legs
that ever I saw

In our graves (as Shakespeere resembles
it) we could dream

In discourse he seems to be wise and
say little

In perpetual trouble and vexation that
need it least

In comes Mr. North very sea-sick from
shore

In a hackney and full of people, was
ashamed to be seen

In my dining-room she was doing
something upon the pott

Inconvenience that do attend the
increase of a man's fortune

Inoffensive vanity of a man who loved
to see himself in the glass

Instructed by Shakespeare himself

Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had
settled all in one corner

It not being handsome for our servants
to sit so equal with us

Justice of God in punishing men for the
sins of their ancestors

Justice of proceeding not to condemn a
man unheard

Keep at interest, which is a good,
quiett, and easy profit

King is at the command of any woman
like a slave

King shall not be able to whip a cat

King was gone to play at Tennis

King hath lost his power, by submitting
himself to this way

King do resolve to declare the Duke of
Monmouth legitimate

King himself minding nothing but his
ease

King is not at present in purse to do

King is mighty kind to these his
bastard children

King the necessity of having, at least,
a show of religion

King be desired to put all Catholiques
out of employment

King still do doat upon his women, even
beyond all shame

King is offended with the Duke of
Richmond's marrying

King of France did think other princes
fit for nothing

King governed by his lust, and women,
and rogues about him

King do tire all his people that are
about him with early rising

King's service is undone, and those
that trust him perish

King's Proclamation against drinking,
swearing, and debauchery

Kingdom will fall back again to a
commonwealth

Kiss my Parliament, instead of "Kiss my
[rump]"

Know yourself to be secure, in being
necessary to the office

L'escholle des filles, a lewd book

Lady Castlemayne is compounding with
the King for a pension

Lady Duchesse the veryest slut and
drudge

Lady Batten to give me a spoonful of
honey for my cold

Lady Castlemaine is still as great with
the King

Lady Castlemayne's nose out of joynt

Lady Castlemayne is now in a higher
command over the King

Lady Castlemayne do rule all at this
time as much as ever

Laissez nous affaire--Colbert

Last day of their doubtfulness touching
her being with child

Last act of friendship in telling me of
my faults also

Laughing and jeering at every thing
that looks strange

Lay long caressing my wife and talking

Lay long in bed talking and pleasing
myself with my wife

Lay chiding, and then pleased with my
wife in bed

Lay with her to-night, which I have not
done these eight (days)

Learned the multiplication table for
the first time in  1661

Learnt a pretty trick to try whether a
woman be a maid or no

Lechery will never leave him

Let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I
being exceedingly full

Let her brew as she has baked

Lewdness and beggary of the Court

Liability of a husband to pay for goods
supplied his wife

Liberty of speech in the House

Listening to no reasoning for it, be it
good or bad

Little content most people have in the
peace

Little children employed, every one to
do something

Little worth of this world, to buy it
with so much pain

Long cloaks being now quite out

Look askew upon my wife, because my
wife do not buckle to them

Lord! to see the absurd nature of
Englishmen

Lord! in the dullest insipid manner
that ever lover did

Lust and wicked lives of the nuns
heretofore in England

Luxury and looseness of the times

Lying a great while talking and
sporting in bed with my wife

Made a lazy sermon, like a Presbyterian

Made to drink, that they might know him
not to be a Roundhead

Made him admire my drawing a thing
presently in shorthand

Magnifying the graces of the nobility
and prelates

Make a man wonder at the good fortune
of such a fool

Man cannot live without playing the
knave and dissimulation
Matters in Ireland are full of
discontent

Meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a
scarlett feavour

Methought very ill, or else I am grown
worse to please

Milke, which I drank to take away, my
heartburne

Mirrors which makes the room seem both
bigger and lighter

Money I have not, nor can get

Money, which sweetens all things

Montaigne is conscious that we are
looking over his shoulder

Most flat dead sermon, both for matter
and manner of delivery

Most homely widow, but young, and
pretty rich, and good natured

Mr. William Pen a Quaker again

Much discourse, but little to be
learned

Musique in the morning to call up our
new-married people

Muske Millon

My wife, coming up suddenly, did find
me embracing the girl

My wife hath something in her gizzard,
that only waits

My heart beginning to falsify in this
business

My old folly and childishnesse hangs
upon me still

My new silk suit, the first that ever I
wore in my life

My Lord, who took physic to-day and was
in his chamber

My wife will keep to one another and
let the world go hang

My wife this night troubled at my
leaving her alone so much

My wife was making of her tarts and
larding of her pullets

My head was not well with the wine that
I drank to-day

My first attempt being to learn the
multiplication-table

My intention to learn to trill

Necessary, and yet the peace is so bad
in its terms

Never laughed so in all my life.  I
laughed till my head ached

Never, while he lives, truckle under
any body or any faction

Never to trust too much to any man in
the world

Never was known to keep two mistresses
in his life (Charles II.)

Never could man say worse himself nor
have worse said

New Netherlands to English rule, under
the title of New York

No Parliament can, as he says, be kept
long good

No manner of means used to quench the
fire

No pleasure--only the variety of it

No money to do it with, nor anybody to
trust us without it

No man is wise at all times

No man was ever known to lose the first
time

No man knowing what to do, whether to
sell or buy

No sense nor grammar, yet in as good
words that ever I saw

No good by taking notice of it, for the
present she forbears

Nonconformists do now preach openly in
houses

None will sell us any thing without our
personal security given

Nor would become obliged too much to
any

Nor will yield that the Papists have
any ground given them

Nor was there any pretty woman that I
did see, but my wife

Nor offer anything, but just what is
drawn out of a man

Not well, and so had no pleasure at all
with my poor wife

Not eat a bit of good meat till he has
got money to pay the men

Not the greatest wits, but the steady
man

Not when we can, but when we list

Not to be censured if their necessities
drive them to bad

Not more than I expected, nor so much
by a great deal as I ought

Not thinking them safe men to receive
such a gratuity

Not permit her begin to do so, lest
worse should follow

Nothing in the world done with true
integrity

Nothing in it approaching that single
page in St. Simon

Nothing of the memory of a man, an
houre after he is dead!

Nothing is to be got without offending
God and the King

Nothing of any truth and sincerity, but
mere envy and design

Now above six months since (smoke from
the cellars)

Offer me L500 if I would desist from
the Clerk of the Acts place

Offered to stop the fire near his house
for such a reward

Officers are four years behind-hand
unpaid

Once a week or so I know a gentleman
must go .  .  .  .

Opening his mind to him as of one that
may hereafter be his foe

Ordered him L2000, and he paid me my
quantum out of it

Ordered in the yarde six or eight
bargemen to be whipped

Origin in the use of a plane against
the grain of the wood

Out also to and fro, to see and be seen

Painful to keep money, as well as to
get it

Parliament being vehement against the
Nonconformists

Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for
every chimney in England

Parliament do agree to throw down
Popery

Parson is a cunning fellow he is as any
of his coat

Peace with France, which, as a
Presbyterian, he do not like

Pen was then turned Quaker

Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of
its nits

Peruques of hair, as the fashion now is
for ladies to wear

Pest coaches and put her into it to
carry her to a pest house

Petition against hackney coaches

Pit, where the bears are baited

Plague claimed 68,596 victims (in 1665)

Plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in
fears of it here

Plague, forty last night, the bell
always going

Play good, but spoiled with the ryme,
which breaks the sense

Pleases them mightily, and me not at
all

Poor seamen that lie starving in the
streets

Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and
Gloves

Pray God give me a heart to fear a
fall, and to prepare for it!

Presbyterians against the House of
Lords

Presse seamen, without which we cannot
really raise men

Pressing in it as if none of us had
like care with him

Pretends to a resolution of being
hereafter very clean

Pretty sayings, which are generally
like paradoxes

Pretty to see the young pretty ladies
dressed like men

Pride of some persons and vice of most
was but a sad story

Pride and debauchery of the present
clergy

Protestants as to the Church of Rome
are wholly fanatiques

Providing against a foule day to get as
much money into my hands

Put up with too much care, that I have
forgot where they are

Quakers being charmed by a string about
their wrists

Quakers do still continue, and rather
grow than lessen

Quakers and others that will not have
any bell ring for them

Rabbit not half roasted, which made me
angry with my wife

Raising of our roofs higher to enlarge
our houses

Reading to my wife and brother
something in Chaucer

Reading over my dear "Faber fortunae,"
of my Lord Bacon's

Receive the applications of people, and
hath presents

Reckon nothing money but when it is in
the bank

Reduced the Dutch settlement of New
Netherlands to English rule

Rejoiced over head and ears in this
good newes

Removing goods from one burned house to
another

Reparation for what we had embezzled

Requisite I be prepared against the
man's friendship

Resolve to have the doing of it
himself, or else to hinder it

Resolve to live well and die a beggar

Resolved to go through it, and it is
too late to help it now

Resolving not to be bribed to dispatch
business

Ridiculous nonsensical book set out by
Will. Pen, for the Quaker

Rotten teeth and false, set in with
wire

Sad sight it was: the whole City almost
on fire

Sad for want of my wife, whom I love
with all my heart

Said to die with the cleanest hands
that ever any Lord Treasurer

Saw "Mackbeth," to our great content

Saw two battles of cocks, wherein is no
great sport

Saw his people go up and down louseing
themselves

Saying, that for money he might be got
to our side

Says, of all places, if there be hell,
it is here

Says of wood, that it is an excrescence
of the earth

Sceptic in all things of religion

Scotch song of "Barbary Allen"

Searchers with their rods in their
hands

See whether my wife did wear drawers
to-day as she used to do

See how a good dinner and feasting
reconciles everybody

See how time and example may alter a
man

Sent my wife to get a place to see
Turner hanged

Sent me last night, as a bribe, a
barrel of sturgeon

Sermon without affectation or study

Sermon ended, and the church broke up,
and my amours ended also

Sermon upon Original Sin, neither
understood by himself

Sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian
one, it was so long

Shakespeare's plays

Shame such a rogue should give me and
all of us this trouble

She is conceited that she do well
already

She used the word devil, which vexed me

She was so ill as to be shaved and
pidgeons put to her feet

She begins not at all to take pleasure
in me or study to please

She is a very good companion as long as
she is well

She also washed my feet in a bath of
herbs, and so to bed

She had got and used some puppy-dog
water

She hath got her teeth new done by La
Roche

She loves to be taken dressing herself,
as I always find her

She so cruel a hypocrite that she can
cry when she pleases

She finds that I am lousy

Short of what I expected, as for the
most part it do fall out

Shy of any warr hereafter, or to
prepare better for it

Sick of it and of him for it

Sicke men that are recovered, they
lying before our office doors

Silence; it being seldom any wrong to a
man to say nothing

Singing with many voices is not singing

Sir W. Pen was so fuddled that we could
not try him to play

Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall,
and so I shall remember

Sit up till 2 o'clock that she may call
the wench up to wash

Slabbering my band sent home for
another

Smoke jack consists of a wind-wheel
fixed in the chimney

So home to supper, and to bed, it being
my wedding night

So great a trouble is fear

So to bed, to be up betimes by the
helpe of a larum watch

So much is it against my nature to owe
anything to any body

So home, and after supper did wash my
feet, and so to bed

So home to prayers and to bed

So I took occasion to go up and to bed
in a pet

So to bed in some little discontent,
but no words from me

So home and to supper with beans and
bacon and to bed

So we went to bed and lay all night in
a quarrel

So much wine, that I was even almost
foxed

So good a nature that he cannot deny
any thing

So time do alter, and do doubtless the
like in myself

So home and to bed, where my wife had
not lain a great while

So out, and lost our way, which made me
vexed

So every thing stands still for money

Softly up to see whether any of the
beds were out of order or no

Some merry talk with a plain bold maid
of the house

Some ends of my own in what advice I do
give her

Sorry in some respect, glad in my
expectations in another respect

Sorry for doing it now, because of
obliging me to do the like

Sorry thing to be a poor King

Spares not to blame another to defend
himself

Sparrowgrass

Speaks rarely, which pleases me
mightily

Spends his time here most, playing at
bowles

Sport to me to see him so earnest on so
little occasion

Staid two hours with her kissing her,
but nothing more

Statute against selling of offices

Staying out late, and painting in the
absence of her husband

Strange things he has been found guilty
of, not fit to name

Strange the folly of men to lay and
lose so much money

Strange how civil and tractable he was
to me

Street ordered to be continued, forty
feet broad, from Paul's

Subject to be put into a disarray upon
very small occasions

Such open flattery is beastly

Suffered her humour to spend, till we
begun to be very quiet

Supper and to bed without one word one
to another

Suspect the badness of the peace we
shall make

Swear they will not go to be killed and
have no pay

Take pins out of her pocket to prick me
if I should touch her

Talk very highly of liberty of
conscience

Taught my wife some part of subtraction

Tax the same man in three or four
several capacities

Tear all that I found either boyish or
not to be worth keeping

Tell me that I speak in my dreams

That I might not seem to be afeared

That I may have nothing by me but what
is worth keeping

That I may look as a man minding
business

The unlawfull use of lawfull things

The devil being too cunning to
discourage a gamester

The most ingenious men may sometimes be
mistaken

"The Alchymist,"--[Comedy by Ben Jonson]

The barber came to trim me and wash me

The present Irish pronunciation of
English

The world do not grow old at all

The ceremonies did not please me, they
do so overdo them

The rest did give more, and did believe
that I did so too

Thence by coach, with a mad coachman,
that drove like mad

Thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I
would with her

There is no passing but by coach in the
streets, and hardly that

There eat and drank, and had my
pleasure of her twice

There did 'tout ce que je voudrais
avec' her

There setting a poor man to keep my
place

There is no man almost in the City
cares a turd for him

There being ten hanged, drawn, and
quartered

These young Lords are not fit to do any
service abroad

These Lords are hard to be trusted

They were so false spelt that I was
ashamed of them

They want where to set their feet, to
begin to do any thing

This day churched, her month of
childbed being out

This absence makes us a little strange
instead of more fond

This week made a vow to myself to drink
no wine this week

This day I began to put on buckles to
my shoes

This unhappinesse of ours do give them
heart

This kind of prophane, mad
entertainment they give themselves

Those absent from prayers were to pay a
forfeit

Those bred in the North among the
colliers are good for labour

Though he knows, if he be not a fool,
that I love him not

Thus it was my chance to see the King
beheaded at White Hall

Tied our men back to back, and thrown
them all into the sea

To Mr. Holliard's in the morning,
thinking to be let blood

To be enjoyed while we are young and
capable of these joys

To see Major-general Harrison hanged,
drawn; and quartered

To the Swan and drank our morning draft

To see the bride put to bed

Too much of it will make her know her
force too much

Took physique, and it did work very
well

Tory--The term was not used politically
until about 1679

Tried the effect of my silence and not
provoking her

Trouble, and more money, to every
Watch, to them to drink

Troubled me, to see the confidence of
the vice of the age

Trumpets were brought under the
scaffold that he not be heard

Turn out every man that will be drunk,
they must turn out all

Two shops in three, if not more,
generally shut up

Uncertainty of all history

Uncertainty of beauty

Unless my too-much addiction to
pleasure undo me

Unquiet which her ripping up of old
faults will give me

Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick
of her months

Up, finding our beds good, but lousy;
which made us merry

Up and took physique, but such as to go
abroad with

Upon a very small occasion had a
difference again broke out

Venison-pasty that we have for supper
to-night to the cook's

Very angry we were, but quickly friends
again

Very great tax; but yet I do think it
is so perplexed

Vexed at my wife's neglect in leaving
of her scarf

Vexed me, but I made no matter of it,
but vexed to myself

Vices of the Court, and how the pox is
so common there

Voyage to Newcastle for coles

Waked this morning between four and
five by my blackbird

Was kissing my wife, which I did not
like

We are to go to law never to revenge,
but only to repayre

We had a good surloyne of rost beefe

Weary of it; but it will please the
citizens
Weather being very wet and hot to keep
meat in.

What way a man could devise to lose so
much in so little time

What I said would not hold water

What I had writ foule in short hand

What they all, through profit or fear,
did promise

What a sorry dispatch these great
persons give to business

What is there more to be had of a woman
than the possessing her

Where money is free, there is great
plenty

Where I find the worst very good

Where a piece of the Cross is

Where a trade hath once been and do
decay, it never recovers

Where I expect most I find least
satisfaction

Wherein every party has laboured to
cheat another

Which he left him in the lurch

Which I did give him some hope of,
though I never intend it

Whip this child till the blood come, if
it were my child!

Whip a boy at each place they stop at
in their procession

Who is the most, and promises the
least, of any man

Who we found ill still, but he do make
very much of it

Who must except against every thing and
remedy nothing

Whose red nose makes me ashamed to be
seen with him

Willing to receive a bribe if it were
offered me

Wine, new and old, with labells pasted
upon each bottle

Wise man's not being wise at all times

Wise men do prepare to remove abroad
what they have

With much ado in an hour getting a
coach home

With a shower of hail as big as walnuts

Wonders that she cannot be as good
within as she is fair without

World sees now the use of them for
shelter of men (fore-castles)

Would make a dogg laugh

Would either conform, or be more wise,
and not be catched!

Would not make my coming troublesome to
any

Wretch, n., often used as an expression
of endearment

Wronged by my over great expectations

Ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of
ye fire




If you wish to read the entire context of any of these quotations,
select a short segment and copy it into your clipboard memory--then open
the following eBook and paste the phrase into your computer's find or
search operation.

The Diaries of Samuel Pepys, Complete
http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/etext03/sp85g10.txt